In this video, you're going to learn how
to integrate SQL with fast API.
Together, I'm going to break everything
down for you guys on how we construct
endpoints in Fast API and more
importantly test these endpoints. But
together, instead of using a Python
dictionary, you're going to learn how to
build a database and integrate SQL into
the APIs. Welcome back to the channel.
Welcome back, guys, for another episode
of Code with Josh. In today's episode,
we're going to be exploring fast API,
but how to integrate a SQL database into
this API, get everything working
together. You're going to explore SQL
alchemy and building out a database
model, as well as how we use paidantic
models to interact with the API. The
best part about fast API is actually the
docs and our ability to run tests on our
API as we're building it out. I'm going
to break all this down for you guys and
explain how we do this in the video.
Let's jump into it.
All right, guys. Jumping right into it.
Now, we're going to be integrating a SQL
database into Fast API using SQL
Alchemy. Um, if you guys missed my last
miniourse, I covered an introduction to
Fast API. I will try and link that video
up here or it's going to be in the
description. That is a great starting
video to understand how fast API works
and end points that you should watch
before jumping straight into here in the
SQL integration. Those two are going to
work together. Now, real quick for fast
API, we're going to be performing like
CRUD operations. And CRUD just means
create, read, update, and delete. These
are our HTTP requests that we're going
to be interacting with Fast API with. A
create is a post request, read is get,
update is put, and delete is delete. And
we will go through how to create these
endpoints as well as interacting with
the fast API docs to actually test this
and make sure everything's working. Now,
first things first, I would need us to
open our terminal and everything we're
going to be using today. We are going to
install. I already have this, but if you
don't already have this, we're going to
need to install fast API. We are going
to install SQL Alchemy.
We're going to install as well.
And uicorn is needed to run fast API
because it's so light. It's not like
Flask. It's even lighter than Flask.
We're going to run it through uicorn to
run the API and check it and test it.
Okay. I already have these installed, so
I'm not going to run this. But if you
don't, you're going to need these. And
then we're pretty much just going to
jump straight to our imports. Okay. So,
I'm going to say from uh fast API, we
want to import fast API, the uh class.
There we go. I am going to do HTTP
exception as well as depends. Each of
these I'm going to cover as we use them.
uh from SQL alchemy we are going to
import create engine we're going to
import column integer and string these
are the data types that we're going to
give to our database along with that
okay we are going to have to tap into
declarative and import declarative base
this is going to be our base model for
SQL alchemy in our database and then
lastly ly we are going to say from OM we
are going to import your session maker
as well as the class session okay so
this is for fast API and SQL alchemy now
SQL alchemy runs on paidantic models
that works best with it so I'm going to
say from pyantic I'm going to import
base model here and then we're just
going to do some uh best practices I'm
going to say from typing uh I might use
it let's do optional and let's do list.
Okay, those are pretty much going to be
our endpoints. Now, to really just get
fast API up and going, let's just make
sure I'm going to say app is equal to.
So, I am making an object, a fast API
object called app. And I'm going to give
it a title. I'm just going to say uh
integration
with SQL.
And let's just say code with Josh.
Okay. And then really once I have an
app, if you guys are getting value in
today's video, help out my channel. Hit
that like button and subscribe. Thank
you guys so much. It does mean the
world. Now, on to today's sponsor. Just
kidding. I don't have a sponsor. It's
kind of myself. My Python master class
is the first link in the description.
that master class I've curated over the
last four years creating a structured
system to help you truly master Python
from A to Z. I break everything down
through interactive lessons, live
coding, as well as real coding
challenges that you guys can challenge
yourself to make sure that you're
learning everything along the way. Not
only is it just a normal master class,
no, you get a private Python community
as well as live Q&A sessions where you
can jump in, ask questions to break
through barriers and further your
understanding. And if you're really
lucky, you're going to get one-on-one
coaching with me, depending on what
level of the master class you choose.
Each level includes all my Python
ebooks. So, if you're ready to excel
your career, change careers, or just all
around learn Python, check out the first
link in the description. And I'm going
to say get. And inside get, we need to
give it the end point. So, for example,
here is my website. If you go to the
landing page, this is the landing page.
And everything starts with the slash.
That is like the homepage. As we build
out endpoints, this is going to change,
right? It's going to be like user or
user one. And this is an endpoint that
we're building out here with fast API,
right? So I'm just going to leave that.
So the first one typically I can define
a function. It's it's going to be called
root. And I'm just going to return a
very basic message here. And this is
just going to be like uh intro to fast
API with SQL
subscribe.
Cool. to run this and just make sure
it's working. I'm going to open my
terminal here. Let's clear my terminal.
And inside here, we're going to need to
use Whoops. Let me uh run that again. We
are going to run uorn. Now, like I said,
uorn is going to help us run this
because it's so lightweight. In order to
run fast API, I'm going to say uicorn.
Type the name. So, mine is my API. I'm
going to say my API colon app not py app
reload. Run that. And it's going to
supply you a URL that I'm going to go
into right here.
Let's make my page smaller. And there
you go. This is the welcome message that
we saw. Okay. But really where Fast API
shines is the documentation. So if I
just go to slashdocs here and I run
this, every time we make an endpoint,
it's going to appear here. And this is
where we can actually run it and we can
test it. All right, so this is this is
pretty cool. Now before we build out any
endpoints, I need to set up SQL to
handle this. We need to create our
models to handle the data and pass that
through not only the API but also into
our database. So coming back here uh
under app we are going to do a few
things. Let's do our database setup and
I'm going to create my engine. This is
really going to be used to establish our
database. For this I'm going to be using
SQL alchemy or not I am going to use SQL
alchemy but I meant SQL light as that's
just best here. So I'm specifying the
type of SQL and then we're just going to
create a database users DB. You can call
this anything you want as long as it
ends in the DB extension. And then
because
fast API is running so many different
threads, SQL can really only do one
thread at a time unless we specify
otherwise. So I'm going to say here a
connect uh args and we're going to say
is equal to check uh check same thread
and I'm going to put that as false.
Okay, just like that. Once I've
established this, I'm going to create a
session. Now usually I'd call this
session, but that's going to interfere
with our import. So I'm just going to
call this session local and we are going
to say our session maker. This is going
to create us a database session. And to
prevent it from autoputting in our data,
to prevent it from reloading every time
it loads, I'm going to do a few things
here. I'm going to say auto commit is
equal to false. We're going to say auto
flush is equal to false. And then we
need to link together the engine with
our session. The engine is what I've
just defined here. So I am binding
together the engine with our session.
Pretty cool. We imported something
called declarative base. This is just
the base class that we can start
building our database model around. So
I'm going to say base is equal to
declarative base. Now down here when we
create our database model I'm going to
say class user and I'm going to give it
the base model. Now everything can be
built out from here. A SQL database is a
lot like an Excel spreadsheet. An Excel
spreadsheet we have different tables. In
each table we have rows and we have
columns. A database model is essentially
like a row in a table. Okay? And each
row has the data for each column. So
let's create a table. I'm going to say
table name is equal to users. Then down
here, what columns do we want to see? I
want to see an ID. I want to see a name.
Let's say an email. Let's say a RO. For
each of these, we need to create a
column, right? This is going to be a
column in our database.
Just like that. ID is what allows us to
tell each user apart. Each user is going
to have their own unique ID which will
be specified by integer. And we don't
actually have to make this primary key
is going to do that for us. This
automatically increments every time you
add someone to your database. And I'm
just going to say index. So it's
indexable. True. The name of a person is
a string. If I want to say the name can
only be a maximum of 100 characters, I
can specify 100. This cannot be empty.
So I'm going to say nillable is false
for these ones. Email is also going to
be a string. And let's say for example,
no one can have the same email. So I'm
going to say unique is true. And then
the role is also going to be a string.
It's it's going to be nullable or
nullable, excuse me. This is our model.
This model needs to speak to our engine
now. So we're going to come down here
and I'm going to say base metadata. We
are going to say create all. Inside that
we're going to give it our engine. All
right. So this is now linking everything
together. All right. Great. The final
step before we build out these endpoints
is we need to create pyantic models.
This is really our API models of what we
send and what we receive. These pyantic
models are basically like a data class
which is really cool. So I'm going to
say here like class let's say user
create and this is going to inherit what
we imported for base model. Now I just
need to specify what data is in each of
these models. So name is a string. Okay.
And I don't have to give it an equals or
a value. This is just a data class. So
I'm making sure that when I give it
name, name is of the data type a string.
We have email. This is also a string.
And we have roll. This is a string.
That would be our first model. Now, fast
API works on what we call model
responses.
And this is for example a class that we
can create. And this model responses job
is to protect any private information
that you might have. And for example, if
you have a password hash or you have
internal notes, it's going to restrict
that from being given out through the
API. And so this is like a safety net to
prevent that. This is going to be our
ID. And this ID is going to match up to
the user in our database. And then all
of these name is a string, email is a
string, ro is a string. I don't really
have any data I want to hide from the
outside, but this would be a model
response. Inside here, we need to set up
a quick configuration. And we're just
going to say from attributes, I'm going
to say is equal to true. Just like that,
these pideantic models are done. Our
database is also done. I want to do a
quick run to establish the database. And
I suppose to handle this the best
practice is we could create a function
called get DB. And all this is going to
do is inside here I'm going to create a
database object. And this is equal to
our session local that I defined up
above. And we're going to try to give
back the database.
Done. And then once that succeeds or
whatever happens there, I'm going to say
DB close. We're going to close the
database. If I want to run it real
quick, we can say get DB. Uh, let's run
our code. Now, when we go over here in
our folders, you're going to see here is
the database that we just made. It's
empty. We can't see it. Just remember,
it's like a spreadsheet. Okay. So, now
that everything is pretty much
established, let's go through to create
some endpoints and actually start
testing this. All right. So let's first
create one for get user
uh for now. For a second I'll put pass
def create user.
Okay. So I'll do these two first. We can
get a user but we can't really get a
user until we create a user. What we're
going to do in order to create a new
endpoint here is above the function
we're going to give it the decorator
with what we are about to do. So I'm
going to say app.get
inside here we need to build out this
endpoint now. So I'm going to say slash
users slash
this is going to take some kind of user
ID just like that. Okay user one user
two. It's going to allow us to get a
single user. And here I'm going to give
it my response. Where is my response
model? And I'm going to say here user
response. This is the user response
class, the pyantic model.
Now, in order to get a user, right,
we're getting one user. So, I need to
make a query to my database. And I need
to fetch the user who matches the user
ID. So, let's create a user object. And
we're going to make a database query to
our model user. And we're going to apply
a filter. What is that filter? Well,
wherever the user ID is equal to user do
ID, we want to get the first one. Now, a
few things here. We don't have user,
right? That's an issue. And I'm not
giving this endpoint my database. That's
also an issue. So, inside our function
here, we're going to say user ID is an
integer. And then we're going to say our
database is actually a session. And this
depends on this function. Okay. So it
depends it means that this whole
endpoint it depends on this function
running and returning the database and
then our user ID is coming from the user
we are trying to collect. So if not user
if there's not a user I'm going to raise
uh our HTTP exception and this is going
to take a status code. So uh like a 404
error for example and then you can
create a detail that just says like user
not found
just like that. Now we always want to
perform that check first so it handles
it. It raises the exception right
otherwise we are just going to return
the user. Okay that's really it that is
what's happening with this endpoint.
Okay, now we can get a user, but we
don't have a user until we create a
user. This is a post request. We are
posting, we are sending information off
to our database. This endpoint, we can
call it users slashno here. And again,
I'm going to give it my response model.
So, I'm going to copy this. We're going
to paste that. And inside here, what do
we need to give it? I need to give it a
user. So I'm going to call this uh what
did we call our pyantic model? User
create. Okay. So I'm going to I'm going
to give it user create.
Okay, just like that. And once again
this depends on our database session. It
depends on if the database was returned
to us. Before we create a new user, we
want to see if it already exists. Now in
the database we said that email must be
unique. People can have the same name,
people can have the same job, but email
needs to be unique. So the first check
I'm going to do is a query to see if the
email is already in our database before
we create a new user. So if db query,
we're going to make a query to the user.
Again, we are going to put a filter on
here and we're going to say user email
is equal to user email. Let's get the
first one back.
Okay. So, if that returns true once
again, I'm going to raise an exception.
I will say user already exists. Did I
exist?
Let's pretend that that's spelled right.
Okay, so the user already exists.
Otherwise, you need to make a new user.
Create a new user. So I'm going to say
here new user is an object of the user
class. So here we're going to give it
everything it needs. So I'm just going
to say user dictionary.
We can take our database and we're going
to add the new user to the database.
And anytime we make changes to the
database, we always commit. If you do
not commit, Python is not speaking to
your database. This information is not
going to your database. Once we commit,
we are going to say refresh. I want to
refresh the database with the new user.
And then we can return the new user.
That's great. Let's save that. Let's
open our terminal real quick and let's
test this. Uvicorn
my API colon appreload.
So I'm going to go to my URL. Let's let
it open. We are going to go to our docs.
There we go. Now we start to see these
endpoints, right? Get. Let's try
creating a user. So if I click try it
out, this is how we test it. Here I can
change this. I'm going to say josh.
Let's put my email zero to
knowinggmail.com
and a string. Let's just say developer
execute.
You can see here that we're getting an
internal server error. And I'm going to
need to check over this now. So, and I
think what we're going to do here is I'm
going to delete my database because it
looks like we have a SQL alchemy error.
Um, to better handle this, let's I don't
think I think just deleting the database
might help. Let's remove those here.
Okay, I'm going to trash the terminal
and let's uh close this
and let's retry it.
Okay, cuz it like if we make changes to
the model or anything like that, often
times SQL Alchemy will throw an error. U
Vicorn
uh my API app reload. So I just want to
I want to make sure that that's not
an issue.
Okay. So docs,
let's create a new user. Let's uh try it
out. Let's just execute. I don't have to
put anything. Boom. Okay. This is
working. So just by refreshing that
database. If I go here now. So that
works. So if I say josh, let's say zero
to knowinggmail.com.
And we are going to say developer
execute.
Yeah. Okay. Look at that. How do we know
it's working? Well, there's no error
here. Okay. But if I go here now, let's
close this. Let's uh Whoops. Let's open
get and let's try to get a user. User
two. Execute.
So, I'm getting an internal error for
now. Get. I'm able to add, but we're
throwing the error for get. Let's look
at our SQL. uh command
you can see here uh cannot access local
variable user when it's not associated
with the value. So
[Music]
uh user ID user oh that's because uh I
did say user ID here. So this should
actually be an underscore
save.
Uh let's refresh this page.
Okay. So, let's test that out now.
Boom. There we go. It is a response.
That's a good response, right? So, we
are up and working. Wonderful.
Wonderful. I'm going to leave it run.
Just close it. That's what reload does.
And really coming down here now, I'm
going to update user. And we are going
to delete user. Just like that. Okay. Uh
and then I guess I will do uh get all
users. We can do that one too. For
update user, we're going to say app.
This is a put. Okay. So put is the HTTP
command for updating data. And we are
just going to give this our user ID as
well. Uh along with our response model
again dropping in that. Great. Let's say
um update
user. This is going to take a user ID
which is an integer. This is going to
take a user which is going to be from
our create user.
And this is also going to depend on our
database being alive and present. Great.
First thing we need to get a database
user, right? So I'm going to say db
query user. We are going to filter. What
do we want to filter by here? User ID is
equal to let's make sure I do an
underscore this time. ID first. If not
db user we are going to raise an error
because they do not exist. And again
we're just going to go up here. I'll say
status code 404 again. Let's just say um
user
does not
exist.
Great. Okay. So if the user doesn't
exist, we raise that error. Otherwise,
we need to loop through our database,
our model. So for every field and value
in our user, let's treat it like a
dictionary. Let's get our items.
Okay, we are going to set the attributes
for this user. So, DB user
field and value. We've made a change to
our database. So, we need to commit. We
need to refresh to our what did I call
it? DB user. And then finally, we are
just going to return the DB user. Let's
go to our docs. Let's refresh. Boom.
There is my put. So just to confirm, we
have number one was just an empty string
that I added all this stuff. Let's
update this information now to show live
information down here. We are going to
try to update user one and let's call
them Josh. No, can't do Josh. Let's say
code with Josh.
Email. You already know my email. So I
am just going to put here
subscribe
and we're going to say YouTube
execute.
Boom. Looks like it works. It's been
updated according to this. If we go up
to run the check now, we're going to go
back execute number one again. And you
can see that it has been updated in our
database. This is awesome, guys. All
right, this brings us into our last real
CRUD operation here. So for this one, we
are going to say app delete. That is the
request that we're doing here. So users
slash user ID. That's who we're
deleting. I'm going to create a function
called delete user. And inside here, we
are going to give it the user ID of an
integer. And where is my database
session? If we delete, we rely on that
session. Now, again, before we even run
this, I can just take these three lines
because first thing I need to see if I'm
even in there to delete. If they're not,
we get an error. Otherwise, we're just
going to say DB delete. Who do you want
to delete? The DB user that we did get
back. We made a change. We're going to
commit. We are going to refresh the
database with the DB user. and we can
return the DB user.
That one was a little more simple. The
only real change here is we just
deleted. So I'm going to go back. We are
going to refresh our dashboard. There is
delete. Let's first uh let's delete the
first user. Execute
internal server error. Okay, so we're
getting an error here. That's okay.
Let's go back. Let's check our terminal.
Uh instance,
where am I going here? Oh,
O down. Uh SQL Alchemy instance is not
persistent with this session. Okay,
that's fine. Let's fix it here. Um and I
think Oh, well, I can't return the user
if they're not there anymore.
That would make sense. Let me see if
this is the problem. Uh, user deleted,
right? You can't return someone if
you've just deleted them. Okay, so let's
refresh that.
Okay, firstly, let me try to see get
back user one to see if they're there
because although I got an error, they
might not even be there anymore. User
not even found. So, I did delete user
one. They're not even there. If I go
down, let's make sure. If we go to
number two, execute. I am still there.
So, we are going to delete user two now
and make sure that we get back that
message. Execute internal server error.
But I'll need to fix that error. If we
go down to two, I have been deleted. I
have been deleted. So, that's working.
But something doesn't match up with uh
me trying to get someone. And I think
that's cuz I'm refreshing again. Let's
let's delete that. Okay, let's do the
last endpoint and then I'll do a grand
check on things. All right, we're just
going to get all the users back. We
could have 10 users, 20 users, who knows
how many. Uh I'm going to create our
last endpoint. We're going to say get
and inside here we're going to say users
slash right there's more than one user
and in fact there we go okay we are
going to give it our response model so
for this one this one slightly changes
I'm going to say response model is equal
to what really this is a list
of user
responses right there going to be more
than one in here. So I'm giving back a
list. I'm just telling it it should be
of that type. And let's just say get all
users. Now when we get all users, this
only relies on our database session. I
don't need any outside information. And
I'm just going to return DB query user
all. That is it. Make sure my
indentation is correct. Save. That is my
error going to go away. It's buffering.
Great. Okay, let's do a quick one more
time check. So, I'm going to clear
everything.
Let's just go. I'm going to create three
users. Okay. Um I'm going to say a Oh,
let's try it out first.
a email testgmail.com
roll testing
uh execute.
That has worked. Let's do another one
real quick since we're here. B testing
roll. Let's say uh video because we're
making a video right now. Execute. And
then we're going to do C
roll. Let's say Python.
execute and I'm probably getting an
error. B didn't go through. Why did I
get an error? Because I'm using the same
email. We can't use the same email. So,
Apple
execute. It did work. Okay, that's user
two. Uh if we go f we go here, uh
googlegmail.com.
Python, it can be the same role. Let's
execute. Okay, it does work. Remember
the same email is locked. We can't use
that. We have three users now. Let's um
refresh.
Okay, there we have get all users.
And we are going to try it out. We're
going to execute.
There we go. These are all the users
that our API has fetched and put into
our database that we've been adding here
with fast API. If I want to go and I
want to delete ID2, right, let's go up.
Let's confirm it and check it. We're
going to go test. We're going to go to
execute.
User has been deleted. I got the correct
message this time. This is great. When I
go to get all my users, we can see that
only one and three are there. This is
how we integrate SQL into fast API.
We've gone through all the routes and if
you came from the last video, the same
sort of concepts apply, right? But these
endpoints are different because now
we're querying our database and each
endpoint relies on the database being
created. When we make a change, we
commit and we refresh. And that
information is sent off to our database
because not only did we create the API
models, we created the database model
that SQL Alchemy is using to
communicate, right? This is how we
integrate fast API and SQL together.
And there you guys have it. That is a
fast API that we built out together. And
we learned how to integrate a SQL
database using an OM, my favorite, SQL
alchemy. If you got value in today's
video, hit that like button and
subscribe. That means the world. So,
thank you guys for being here and I
really hope you did enjoy this content.
Drop a comment. Let me know what you
guys want to see going forward. more
types of content surrounding Fast API or
something else you're struggling with
because I'm ready to dive in and break
it down. Remember the first link in the
description, that's my Python master
class where now anyone can join where
you unlock over 135 hands-on lessons,
live Q&A sessions, all my ebooks, and
maybe even some one-on-one coaching. I
can't wait to see you guys there. Until
next week's episode of Code with Josh,
guys, I will see you then.